no copy button when code-block language appended with -nocopy (#1584)
redpanda-data/documentation: modules/manage/partials/gbac-dp.adoc

// tag::single-source[]

> Group-based access control (GBAC) builds on xref:manage:security/authorization/rbac.adoc[role-based access control (RBAC)] to simplify permission management at scale. Instead of assigning roles or ACLs to individual users, you assign them to OIDC groups managed by your identity provider (IdP). Users inherit permissions from all groups reported in their OIDC token claims, so onboarding and offboarding require no changes in Redpanda.

Reviewer: > Group-based access control (GBAC) builds on xref:manage:security/authorization/rbac.adoc[role-based access control (RBAC)]

I think we should make a similar adjustment as [this other convo](https://github.com/redpanda-data/docs/pull/1586#discussion_r2849461859).

> Group-based access control (GBAC) builds on xref:manage:security/authorization/rbac.adoc[role-based access control (RBAC)] to simplify permission management at scale. Instead of assigning roles or ACLs to individual users, you assign them to OIDC groups managed by your identity provider (IdP). Users inherit permissions from all groups reported in their OIDC token claims, so onboarding and offboarding require no changes in Redpanda.

Reviewer: I wonder if we should mention OIDC earlier in the paragraph (like in the first sentence) so readers immediately understand that GBAC depends on OIDC being configured. I think the OIDC dependency could be easy to miss upfront until the reader reads further down (like the Prerequisites section).

After reading this page, you will be able to:

* [ ] {learning-objective-1}
* [ ] {learning-objective-2}
* [ ] {learning-objective-3}

== How GBAC works

When a user authenticates with OIDC, Redpanda reads a configurable claim from the JWT access token (for example, `$.groups`) and extracts the list of groups the user belongs to. Redpanda then matches those group names against `Group:<name>` principals in its ACLs and role assignments.

Group membership is managed entirely by your IdP. Redpanda never stores or manages group membership directly. It reads group information from the OIDC token at authentication time.

GBAC works across all Redpanda APIs:

* Kafka API
* Admin API
* Schema Registry
* HTTP Proxy

=== Authorization patterns

GBAC supports two usage patterns:

Group assigned to a role:: Assign a group as a member of a role-based access control (RBAC) role. All users in the group inherit the role's ACLs.

Group as an ACL principal:: Create an ACL with a `Group:<name>` principal. Users in that group receive that permission directly.

> Both patterns can be used together. When a user belongs to multiple groups, they inherit the combined permissions of all groups.

Reviewer: I think the deny-first behavior could be worth mentioning in this section. The authorizer checks deny rules before allow rules across all groups, and if any group matches a deny ACL for a resource, the user is denied (even if another group would've granted allow).

Reviewer: Oh I see it's mentioned in the Limitations section, but I still think it'd be helpful to mention here as well.

  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
    "roleName": "DataEngineers",
    "members": [{"group": {"name": "engineering"}}]
  }'
----

To remove a group from a role, call `RemoveRoleMembers`:

[,bash]
----
curl -u <user>:<password> \
  --request POST 'http://localhost:9644/redpanda.core.admin.v2.SecurityService/RemoveRoleMembers' \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
    "roleName": "DataEngineers",
    "members": [{"group": {"name": "engineering"}}]
  }'
----
--
endif::[]
====

== Create group-based ACLs

You can grant permissions directly to a group by creating an ACL with a `Group:<name>` principal. This works the same as creating an ACL for a user, but uses the `Group:` prefix instead of `User:`.

[tabs]
====
rpk::
+
--
To grant cluster-level access to the `engineering` group:

[,bash]
----
rpk security acl create --allow-principal Group:engineering --operation describe --cluster
----

To grant topic-level access:

[,bash]
----
rpk security acl create \
  --allow-principal Group:engineering \
  --operation read,describe \
  --topic 'analytics-' \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed
----

> If your groups use path-style names (with `nested_group_behavior: none`), use the full path as the principal name:

Reviewer: Is there a way to add a link to the `Customize token claim extraction#nested_group_behavior` section below or the nested_group_behavior section in the cluster properties reference? I think that could be helpful.

  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --header 'Authorization: Bearer <jwt-access-token>' \
  --data '{}'
----
--
endif::[]
====

== Supported identity providers

GBAC works with any OIDC-compliant identity provider. These providers are commonly used with Redpanda:

* https://auth0.com/docs/manage-users/groups[Auth0^]: Configure group claims in Auth0 Actions or Rules.
* https://developer.okta.com/docs/concepts/groups/[Okta^]: Assign groups to applications and include them in token claims.
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity/hybrid/connect/how-to-connect-fed-group-claims[Microsoft Entra ID (Azure AD)^]: Configure group claims in the application manifest.

For IdP-specific configuration steps, refer to your provider's documentation.

== Limitations

Azure AD group limit::
Users with more than 200 group memberships in Azure AD receive a URL reference in their token instead of a list of group names. Redpanda does not follow that URL and cannot resolve groups in this case. Mitigation: filter token claims to include only the groups relevant to Redpanda.

Nested groups::

> Redpanda does not recursively resolve nested group hierarchies. If group A contains group B, only the direct memberships reported in the token are used. Use `nested_group_behavior: suffix` to extract the last path segment from hierarchical group names when needed.

Reviewer: Adding a link to Customize token claim extraction#nested_group_behavior or the nested_group_behavior section in the cluster properties reference could be helpful here too, if possible.

No wildcard ACLs for groups::
ACL matching for `Group:` principals uses literal string comparison only. Wildcard patterns are not supported.

Deny ACL precedence::
When a user belongs to multiple groups with conflicting ACLs, deny rules take precedence over allow rules. This is consistent with standard Redpanda ACL conflict resolution.

Group membership timing::
Group membership reflects the claims in the OIDC token at authentication time. Changes made in the IdP (adding or removing group memberships) take effect at the user's next authentication, when a new token is issued.

== Customize token claim extraction

Different identity providers store group information in different locations within the JWT token. Two cluster properties control how Redpanda extracts group names:

xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#oidc_group_claim_path[`oidc_group_claim_path`]:: A https://goessner.net/articles/JsonPath/[JSON path^] expression that tells Redpanda where to find group information in the OIDC token. For example, Auth0 and Okta typically use a top-level `groups` claim (`$.groups`), while Keycloak nests roles inside `realm_access` (`$.realm_access.roles`). Default: `$.groups`.

> xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#nested_group_behavior[`nested_group_behavior`]:: Controls how Redpanda handles group names that use path-style notation (for example, `/departments/eng/platform`). Set to `none` to use the full path as-is, or `suffix` to extract only the last segment. Default: `none`.

Reviewer: I think we should warn that `suffix` can cause unintended collisions when groups share a leaf name (e.g. `/departments/eng/groupA` and `/departments/sales/groupA` both collapse to `groupA`). In that case, ACLs or role assignments for `Group:groupA` would apply to members of both groups. Maybe we should make a note so users are aware of this behavior when designing their group naming conventions and ACLs.

Group membership is managed entirely by your IdP. Redpanda never stores or manages group membership directly. It reads group information from the OIDC token at authentication time.

GBAC works across all Redpanda APIs:

* Kafka API
* Admin API
* Schema Registry
* HTTP Proxy

=== Authorization patterns

GBAC supports two usage patterns:

Group assigned to a role:: Assign a group as a member of a role-based access control (RBAC) role. All users in the group inherit the role's ACLs.

Group as an ACL principal:: Create an ACL with a `Group:<name>` principal. Users in that group receive that permission directly.

Both patterns can be used together. When a user belongs to multiple groups, they inherit the combined permissions of all groups.

Redpanda evaluates all authorization sources (user ACLs, role ACLs, group ACLs, and group-to-role ACLs) in a single unified flow. Deny rules are checked first across all sources. If any source produces a deny, the request is rejected regardless of allows from other sources. If no deny is found, Redpanda checks for an allow across all sources. If no allow is found, the request is denied by default.

.Authorization evaluation flow

> [mermaid]

Reviewer 2: nit - could we get this larger by default and aligned horizontally to take up more of the page space?

Reviewer 3: Defined width for diagram

....
flowchart TD
    A[Request] --> B{"Check all sources\nfor deny"}

    B -- "Deny found" --> DENY["❌ Deny"]
    B -- "No deny found" --> C{"Check all sources\nfor allow"}

    C -- "Allow found" --> ALLOW["✅ Allow"]
    C -- "No allow found" --> DEFAULT["❌ Default deny"]

    style DENY fill:#f44,color:#fff
    style ALLOW fill:#4a4,color:#fff
    style DEFAULT fill:#f44,color:#fff

    subgraph sources [" "]
        direction LR
        S1["User ACLs"]
        S2["Role ACLs\n(RBAC)"]
        S3["Group ACLs"]
        S4["Group→Role\nACLs"]
    end
....

== Prerequisites

* xref:manage:security/authentication.adoc#oidc[OIDC authentication] must be configured and enabled on your cluster.

> * Superuser access to configure cluster properties and manage ACLs.

Reviewer 2: nit - this is a prerequisite to enable OIDC, so should appear first

Reviewer 4: @treevon for Cloud should we just remove this superuser prereq?

Reviewer 4: @treevon since we don't have superuser in Cloud, can we remove (conditionalize this out) for Cloud?

Reviewer 4: @kbatuigas would you please conditionalize this out for Cloud docs?

Reviewer 3: Moved superuser prereq into conditional

ifndef::env-cloud[]
* You must have xref:get-started:licensing/overview.adoc[Enterprise Edition] license on your cluster.
endif::[]

== Assign groups to roles

> Assigning a group to an RBAC role is the recommended pattern for managing permissions at scale. All users in the group inherit the role's ACLs automatically.

Reviewer 2: We should have a link to RBAC configuration here

Reviewer 3: Link added

  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
    "roleName": "DataEngineers",
    "members": [{"group": {"name": "engineering"}}]
  }'
----

To remove a group from a role, call `RemoveRoleMembers`:

[,bash]
----
curl -u <user>:<password> \
  --request POST 'http://localhost:9644/redpanda.core.admin.v2.SecurityService/RemoveRoleMembers' \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
    "roleName": "DataEngineers",
    "members": [{"group": {"name": "engineering"}}]
  }'
----
--
endif::[]
====

== Create group-based ACLs

You can grant permissions directly to a group by creating an ACL with a `Group:<name>` principal. This works the same as creating an ACL for a user, but uses the `Group:` prefix instead of `User:`.

[tabs]
====
rpk::
+
--
To grant cluster-level access to the `engineering` group:

[,bash]
----
rpk security acl create --allow-principal Group:engineering --operation describe --cluster
----

To grant topic-level access:

[,bash]
----
rpk security acl create \
  --allow-principal Group:engineering \
  --operation read,describe \
  --topic 'analytics-' \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed
----

> If your groups use path-style names (with xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#nested_group_behavior[`nested_group_behavior`] set to `none`), use the full path as the principal name:

Reviewer 2: I think we should move this to the section on claim extraction

Both patterns can be used together. When a user belongs to multiple groups, they inherit the combined permissions of all groups.

Redpanda evaluates all authorization sources (user ACLs, role ACLs, group ACLs, and group-to-role ACLs) in a single unified flow. Deny rules are checked first across all sources. If any source produces a deny, Redpanda rejects the request regardless of allows from other sources. If no deny is found, Redpanda checks for an allow across all sources. If no allow is found, Redpanda denies the request by default.

.Authorization evaluation flow
[mermaid,width=100%]
....
flowchart LR
    A[Request] --> B{"Check all sources\nfor deny"}

    B -- "Deny found" --> DENY["❌ Deny"]
    B -- "No deny found" --> C{"Check all sources\nfor allow"}

    C -- "Allow found" --> ALLOW["✅ Allow"]
    C -- "No allow found" --> DEFAULT["❌ Default deny"]

    style DENY fill:#f44,color:#fff
    style ALLOW fill:#4a4,color:#fff
    style DEFAULT fill:#f44,color:#fff

    subgraph sources [" "]
        direction LR
        S1["User ACLs"]
        S2["Role ACLs\n(RBAC)"]
        S3["Group ACLs"]
        S4["Group→Role\nACLs"]
    end
....

> == Prerequisites

Reviewer 4: suggest moving Prerequisites up above How GBAC works

To use GBAC, you need:

ifndef::env-cloud[]
* An xref:get-started:licensing/overview.adoc[Enterprise Edition] license applied to your cluster.
endif::[]
* xref:manage:security/authentication.adoc#oidc[OIDC authentication] configured and enabled on your cluster.
* Superuser access to configure cluster properties and manage ACLs.

== Supported identity providers

GBAC works with any OIDC-compliant identity provider. These providers are commonly used with Redpanda:

> * https://auth0.com/docs/manage-users/groups[Auth0^]: Configure group claims in Auth0 Actions or Rules.

Reviewer 4: I get a 404 on Auth0 link

Reviewer 3: Updated

> * https://developer.okta.com/docs/concepts/groups/[Okta^]: Assign groups to applications and include them in token claims.

Reviewer 4: also 404 on Otka link

Reviewer 3: Updated

* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity/hybrid/connect/how-to-connect-fed-group-claims[Microsoft Entra ID (Azure AD)^]: Configure group claims in the application manifest.

> For IdP-specific configuration steps, refer to your provider's documentation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For IdP-specific configuration steps, see your provider's documentation.
```

== Limitations

> 

Reviewer 4: suggest making these limitations a bulleted list instead of sections, so limitations aren't called out so obviously in the right side nav

Reviewer 3: Changed to bullet points

=== Azure AD group limit

> Users with more than 200 group memberships in Azure AD receive a URL reference in their token instead of a list of group names. Redpanda does not follow that URL and cannot resolve groups in this case. Mitigation: filter token claims to include only the groups relevant to Redpanda.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Users with more than 200 group memberships in Azure AD receive a URL reference in their token instead of a list of group names. Redpanda does not follow that URL and cannot resolve groups in this case. 

Mitigation: Filter token claims to include only the groups relevant to Redpanda.
```

[tabs]
====
rpk::
+
--
To grant cluster-level access to the `engineering` group:

[,bash]
----
rpk security acl create --allow-principal Group:engineering --operation describe --cluster
----

To grant topic-level access:

[,bash]
----
rpk security acl create \
  --allow-principal Group:engineering \
  --operation read,describe \
  --topic 'analytics-' \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed
----

--
{ui}::
+
--
include::manage:partial$gbac-create-group-acl.adoc[]
--
====

== View groups and roles

=== List groups assigned to a role

[tabs]
====
rpk::
+
--
To see which groups are assigned to a role, use `--print-groups`:

[,bash]
----
rpk security role describe <role-name> --print-groups
----

For example:

[,bash]
----
rpk security role describe DataEngineers --print-groups
----

To list all roles assigned to a specific group:

[,bash]
----
rpk security role list --group <group-name>
----

For example:

[,bash]
----
rpk security role list --group engineering
----
--
ifndef::env-cloud[]
Admin API::
+
--

> These operations use the link:/api/doc/admin/v2/group/endpoint-securityservice[Admin API v2] `SecurityService`. Send all requests as `POST` with a JSON body.

Reviewer 4: link doesn't work but maybe that's just an issue with preview docs?

Reviewer 3: Yes, this will work when https://github.com/redpanda-data/api-docs/pull/60 is merged

  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{"name": "DataEngineers"}'
----

The response includes a `members` array with both `user` and `group` entries.

To list all roles, make a link:/api/doc/admin/v2/operation/operation-redpanda-core-admin-v2-securityservice-listroles[`POST ListRoles`] request:

[,bash]
----
curl -u <user>:<password> \
  --request POST 'http://localhost:9644/redpanda.core.admin.v2.SecurityService/ListRoles' \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{}'
----

To verify how Redpanda resolves groups from an OIDC token, make a link:/api/doc/admin/v2/operation/operation-redpanda-core-admin-v2-securityservice-resolveoidcidentity[`POST ResolveOidcIdentity`] request. Pass the token in the `Authorization` header. The response includes the resolved `principal`, token expiry, and a `groups` field listing all groups extracted from the token:

[,bash]
----
curl \
  --request POST 'http://localhost:9644/redpanda.core.admin.v2.SecurityService/ResolveOidcIdentity' \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --header 'Authorization: Bearer <jwt-access-token>' \
  --data '{}'
----
--
endif::[]
====

> 

Reviewer 4: It's a little weird that the options for Create group-based ACLs include rpk and Console but right after View groups and roles options include rpk and Admin API. We can add Console for that too, right?

Reviewer 3: Added Console tab

* xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#nested_group_behavior[`nested_group_behavior`]: Controls how Redpanda handles group names that use path-style notation (for example, `/departments/eng/platform`). Set to `none` to use the full path as-is, or `suffix` to extract only the last segment. Default: `none`.
+
NOTE: When `nested_group_behavior` is set to `suffix`, groups that share a leaf name (for example, `/departments/eng/groupA` and `/departments/sales/groupA`) both resolve to `Group:groupA`. ACLs or role assignments for that principal apply to members of both groups. Design your group naming conventions to avoid unintended collisions.

ifndef::env-cloud[]
To update these properties, use xref:manage:cluster-maintenance/cluster-property-configuration.adoc[any configuration method] (`rpk cluster config set`, the Admin API, or Redpanda Console). Changes take effect immediately without a restart.
endif::[]

ifdef::env-cloud[]
Contact Redpanda support to configure these properties on Cloud clusters.

> endif::[]

Reviewer 4: Do we need to confirm that, that these properties will not be configurable in Cloud? And it looks like we still need to create a PR in cloud-docs to add GBAC to Cloud.

=== Token structure examples

==== Flat group values (default)

With `oidc_group_claim_path: "$.groups"`, Redpanda extracts principals `Group:engineering` and `Group:analytics` from the token.

[,json]
----
{"groups": ["engineering", "analytics"]}
----

==== Nested claim

With `oidc_group_claim_path: "$.realm_access.roles"`, Redpanda extracts principals `Group:eng` and `Group:fin` from the token.

[,json]
----
{"realm_access": {"roles": ["eng", "fin"]}}
----

==== Path-style group names with no suffix extraction (default)

With `nested_group_behavior: "none"` (the default), Redpanda maps the full path to principals `Group:/departments/eng/platform` and `Group:/departments/eng/infra`.

[,json]
----
{"groups": ["/departments/eng/platform", "/departments/eng/infra"]}
----

==== Path-style group names with suffix extraction

When xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#nested_group_behavior[`nested_group_behavior`] is set to `suffix`, Redpanda maps the last path segment to principals `Group:platform` and `Group:infra`.

[,json]
----
{"groups": ["/departments/eng/platform", "/departments/eng/infra"]}
----

==== CSV-formatted group claim

> 

Reviewer 4: For CSV, I think the text should go above the example, similar to the others

Reviewer: I feel like the text would make more sense below the token example rather then before. For ex, I think this reads better
> this is an example token group claim from the idp
> this is how redpanda would extract the groups from that token

rather than
> this is how redpanda would extract the groups from that token
> this is an example token group claim from the idp

[,json]
----
{"groups": "engineering,analytics,finance"}
----

Redpanda automatically splits comma-separated values and extracts principals `Group:engineering`, `Group:analytics`, and `Group:finance`.

== Troubleshoot GBAC

If group-based permissions are not working as expected:

> * Use the `ResolveOidcIdentity` Admin API endpoint to verify which groups Redpanda extracts from a token. See <<view-groups-and-roles>>.

Reviewer 4: need to conditionalize out Admin API for Cloud (or add Cloud API if available)

Reviewer 3: I think some of the new [Cloud API endpoints](https://docs.redpanda.com/api/doc/cloud-controlplane/version/ec2c3f1b-288c-4b1a-b259-6febf1f0b146/group/endpoint-control-plane-groups) are relevant, but I can confirm

* Temporarily enable debug logging for the `security` logger to see all claims in the validated JWT:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk redpanda admin config log-level set security --level debug
----
+
This helps diagnose incorrect claim paths, missing groups, or token content issues. The debug level reverts automatically after the expiry period (default: 300 seconds).

== Audit logging

> When xref:manage:audit-logging.adoc[audit logging] is enabled, authentication events across Kafka API, HTTP Proxy, Schema Registry, and Admin API include the user's IdP group memberships in the `user.groups` field with type `idp_group`.

Reviewer 4: same, need to conditionalize Admin API

== Suggested reading

> 

Reviewer 4: The list of suggested readings have already been linked above, and idk if the labs are really relevant. I'd probably replace with a Next steps

Reviewer 3: Changed Suggested reading to Next steps, but I think the labs automatically display based on the page categories

GBAC extends xref:manage:security/authentication.adoc#oidc[OIDC authentication] and supports two ways to grant permissions to groups: create xref:manage:security/authorization/acl.adoc[ACLs] with `Group:<name>` principals, or assign groups as members of xref:manage:security/authorization/rbac.adoc[RBAC] roles. Both approaches can be used independently or together.

After reading this page, you will be able to:

* [ ] {learning-objective-1}
* [ ] {learning-objective-2}
* [ ] {learning-objective-3}

== Prerequisites

To use GBAC, you need:

ifndef::env-cloud[]
* An xref:get-started:licensing/overview.adoc[Enterprise Edition] license applied to your cluster.
endif::[]
* xref:manage:security/authentication.adoc#oidc[OIDC authentication] configured and enabled on your cluster.

> * Superuser access to configure cluster properties and manage ACLs.

Reviewer: Is it's worth adding an external IdP as a prerequisite? Or is it's obvious/implied?

Reviewer 3: Added "Your IdP configured to include group claims in the OIDC access token (for example, a `groups` claim)."

== How GBAC works

When a user authenticates with OIDC, Redpanda reads a configurable claim from the JWT access token (for example, `$.groups`) and extracts the list of groups the user belongs to. Redpanda then matches those group names against `Group:<name>` principals in its ACLs and role assignments.

Group membership is managed entirely by your IdP. Redpanda never stores or manages group membership directly. It reads group information from the OIDC token at authentication time. Changes you make in the IdP (adding or removing group memberships) take effect at the user's next authentication, when a new token is issued.

GBAC works across all Redpanda APIs:

* Kafka API

> * Admin API

Reviewer: GBAC doesn't actually have any impact/influence on the Admin API. I think the Admin API only checks that your principal is a superuser and doesn't consider the groups at all (because I don't think you can set ACLs for Admin API endpoints).

* Schema Registry
* HTTP Proxy

=== Authorization patterns

GBAC supports two usage patterns:

* Group assigned to a role: Assign a group as a member of a role-based access control (RBAC) role. All users in the group inherit the role's ACLs.

> * Group as an ACL principal: Create an ACL with a `Group:<name>` principal. Users in that group receive that permission directly.

Reviewer: I feel I'd make sense to put "Group as an ACL principal" first and "Group assigned to a role" second, since Group assigned to a role (which gets ACLs) is 1 more layer of indirection than Group ACLs:
- Group <-- ACLs
- Group -- Role <-- ACLs

* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity/hybrid/connect/how-to-connect-fed-group-claims[Microsoft Entra ID (Azure AD)^]: Configure group claims in the application manifest.

For IdP-specific configuration steps, see your provider's documentation.

== Limitations

* Azure AD group limit: Users with more than 200 group memberships in Azure AD receive a URL reference in their token instead of a list of group names. Redpanda does not follow that URL and cannot resolve groups in this case.
+
Mitigation: Filter token claims to include only the groups relevant to Redpanda.

* Nested groups: Redpanda does not recursively resolve nested group hierarchies. If group A contains group B, only the direct memberships reported in the token are used. Use xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#nested_group_behavior[`nested_group_behavior: suffix`] to extract the last path segment from hierarchical group names when needed.

* No wildcard ACLs for groups: ACL matching for `Group:` principals uses literal string comparison only. Wildcard patterns are not supported.

> == Assign groups to roles

Reviewer: Related: https://github.com/redpanda-data/docs/pull/1584/changes#r2997647468
I feel sort of the same way with the ordering of this section and L169, I think showing Direct Group ACLs first and then showing the additional indirection of Group--Roles<--ACLs would be easier to understand.

Reviewer: Never mind, I just saw the note about "Redpanda Console assigns ACLs through roles". Maybe the overloading of the term "role" is a little confusing and reordering it might not help.

To assign a group to a role, make a link:/api/doc/admin/v2/operation/operation-redpanda-core-admin-v2-securityservice-addrolemembers[`POST AddRoleMembers`] request:

[,bash]
----
curl -u <user>:<password> \
  --request POST 'http://localhost:9644/redpanda.core.admin.v2.SecurityService/AddRoleMembers' \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
    "roleName": "DataEngineers",
    "members": [{"group": {"name": "engineering"}}]
  }'
----

To remove a group from a role, make a link:/api/doc/admin/v2/operation/operation-redpanda-core-admin-v2-securityservice-removerolemembers[`POST RemoveRoleMembers`] request:

[,bash]
----
curl -u <user>:<password> \
  --request POST 'http://localhost:9644/redpanda.core.admin.v2.SecurityService/RemoveRoleMembers' \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
    "roleName": "DataEngineers",
    "members": [{"group": {"name": "engineering"}}]
  }'
----
--
endif::[]
====

== Create group-based ACLs

> You can grant permissions directly to a group by creating an ACL with a `Group:<name>` principal. This works the same as creating an ACL for a user, but uses the `Group:` prefix instead of `User:`.

Reviewer: I think the [ACL terminology table](https://deploy-preview-1584--redpanda-docs-preview.netlify.app/current/manage/security/authorization/acl/#acl-terminology) might also need to be updated (the row for "Principal")

> You can grant permissions directly to a group by creating an ACL with a `Group:<name>` principal. This works the same as creating an ACL for a user, but uses the `Group:` prefix instead of `User:`.

Reviewer: Might be nice to have a link to the ACLs page so the reader can see more details of how to use ACLs?

----

==== Path-style group names with suffix extraction

When xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#nested_group_behavior[`nested_group_behavior`] is set to `suffix`, Redpanda maps the last path segment to principals `Group:platform` and `Group:infra`.

[,json]
----
{"groups": ["/departments/eng/platform", "/departments/eng/infra"]}
----

==== CSV-formatted group claim

Redpanda automatically splits comma-separated values and extracts principals `Group:engineering`, `Group:analytics`, and `Group:finance`.

[,json]
----
{"groups": "engineering,analytics,finance"}
----

== Troubleshoot GBAC

If group-based permissions are not working as expected:

ifndef::env-cloud[]
* Use the `ResolveOidcIdentity` Admin API endpoint to verify which groups Redpanda extracts from a token. See <<view-groups-and-roles>>.
endif::[]
* Temporarily enable debug logging for the `security` logger to see all claims in the validated JWT:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk redpanda admin config log-level set security --level debug
----
+
This helps diagnose incorrect claim paths, missing groups, or token content issues. The debug level reverts automatically after the expiry period (default: 300 seconds).

> 

Reviewer: Would it be helpful to add the example of how to decode & inspect the OIDC token to check for groups (as shown in the TOI), or is that more in the realm of IdP documentation rather than redpanda documention?

Reviewer 3: [Added](https://github.com/redpanda-data/docs/pull/1584/changes#diff-4ed70c7b24a0396ac8f37abed5b46393542c0fdbc0f7e4868eace85f52709163R512)

== Audit logging

ifndef::env-cloud[]
When xref:manage:audit-logging.adoc[audit logging] is enabled, authentication events across Kafka API, HTTP Proxy, Schema Registry, and Admin API include the user's IdP group memberships in the `user.groups` field with type `idp_group`.
endif::[]
ifdef::env-cloud[]

> When xref:manage:audit-logging.adoc[audit logging] is enabled, authentication events across Kafka API, HTTP Proxy, and Schema Registry include the user's IdP group memberships in the `user.groups` field with type `idp_group`.

Reviewer: Reviewing this the first time around made me realize that we were missing audit logging for Authorization events against direct group ACLs, so I added that recently. See
- https://redpandadata.atlassian.net/browse/CORE-15905?search_id=85209964-16c3-4860-a636-e389921981f8
- https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/pull/29935

Reviewer: Here's a sample audit log for the API Activity event (6003) with an Authorization matched against an ALLOW ACL directly on a Group:
```json
{
    "category_uid": 6,
    "class_uid": 6003,
    "metadata": {
        "product": {
            "name": "Redpanda",
            "uid": "0",
            "vendor_name": "Redpanda Data, Inc.",
            "version": "v26.1.0-dev"
        },
        "profiles": [
            "cloud"
        ],
        "version": "1.0.0"
    },
    "severity_id": 1,
    "time": 1774544504327,
    "type_uid": 600303,
    "activity_id": 3,
    "actor": {
        "authorizations": [
            {
                "decision": "authorized",
                "policy": {
                    "desc": "acl: {principal type {group} name {/sales} host {{any_host}} op all perm allow}, resource: type {topic} name {sales-topic} pattern {literal}",
                    "name": "aclAuthorization"
                }
            }
        ],
        "user": {
            "name": "alice",
            "type_id": 1,
            "groups": [
                {
                    "type": "idp_group",
                    "name": "/sales"
                }
            ]
        }
    },
    "api": {
        "operation": "produce",
        "service": {
            "name": "kafka rpc protocol"
        }
    },
    "cloud": {
        "provider": ""
    },
    "dst_endpoint": {
        "ip": "127.0.1.1",
        "port": 9092,
        "svc_name": "kafka rpc protocol"
    },
    "resources": [
        {
            "name": "sales-topic",
            "type": "topic"
        }
    ],
    "src_endpoint": {
        "ip": "127.0.0.1",
        "name": "rdkafka",
        "port": 42728
    },
    "status_id": 1,
    "unmapped": {
        "authorization_metadata": {
            "acl_authorization": {
                "host": "{{any_host}}",
                "op": "all",
                "permission_type": "allow",
                "principal": "type {group} name {/sales}"
            },
            "resource": {
                "name": "sales-topic",
                "pattern": "literal",
                "type": "topic"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

For IdP-specific configuration steps, see your provider's documentation.

== Limitations

* Azure AD group limit: Users with more than 200 group memberships in Azure AD receive a URL reference in their token instead of a list of group names. Redpanda does not follow that URL and cannot resolve groups in this case.
+
Mitigation: Filter token claims to include only the groups relevant to Redpanda.

* Nested groups: Redpanda does not recursively resolve nested group hierarchies. If group A contains group B, only the direct memberships reported in the token are used. Use xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#nested_group_behavior[`nested_group_behavior: suffix`] to extract the last path segment from hierarchical group names when needed.

* No wildcard ACLs for groups: ACL matching for `Group:` principals uses literal string comparison only. Wildcard patterns are not supported.

ifdef::env-cloud[]
== Register groups in Redpanda Cloud

To assign an IdP group to a role or ACL, you must first register the group:

[tabs]
====
Cloud UI::
+
--
. From *Security* on the left navigation menu, select the *Groups* tab.

> . 

Reviewer 4: @kbatuigas reminder about these steps. We can update later if necessary

--

Control Plane API::
+
--
Make a link:/api/doc/cloud-controlplane/operation/operation-groupservice_creategroup[`POST /v1/groups`] request to the xref:redpanda-cloud:manage:api/cloud-byoc-controlplane-api.adoc[Control Plane API]:

[,bash]
----
curl -X POST 'https://api.redpanda.com/v1/groups' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -H 'Authorization: Bearer <token>' \
  -d '{
    "group": {
      "name": "<group-name>",
      "description": "<group-description>"
    }
  }'
----

Replace `<group-name>` with the name that matches the group in your IdP (for example, `engineering`). The name must match exactly for GBAC to map the group correctly.
--
====
endif::[]

== Assign groups to roles

To manage permissions at scale, assign a group to an xref:{rbac-doc}[RBAC] role. All users in the group inherit the role's ACLs automatically.

[tabs]
====
rpk::
+
--
To assign a group to a role:

[,bash]
----

> rpk security role assign <role-name> --group <group-name>

Reviewer 5: We ended up pivoting to using ACLs directly in rpk. This gets rid of `--group` in favor of the principal directly, so `rpk security role assign <role-name> --principal Group:<group-name>`

[,bash]
----
curl -X POST "${DATAPLANE_API_URL}/v1/acls" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "resource_type": "RESOURCE_TYPE_TOPIC",
    "resource_name": "analytics-events",
    "resource_pattern_type": "RESOURCE_PATTERN_TYPE_LITERAL",
    "principal": "Group:engineering",
    "host": "*",
    "operation": "OPERATION_READ",
    "permission_type": "PERMISSION_TYPE_ALLOW"
  }'
----
--
endif::[]
====

== View groups and roles

Use the following commands to inspect group assignments and role memberships.

=== List groups assigned to a role

[tabs]
====
rpk::
+
--
To see which groups are assigned to a role, use `--print-groups`:

[,bash]
----
rpk security role describe <role-name> --print-groups
----

For example:

[,bash]
----
rpk security role describe DataEngineers --print-groups
----

To list all roles assigned to a specific group:

[,bash]
----
rpk security role list --group <group-name>
----

For example:

[,bash]
----
rpk security role list --group engineering
----

> --

Reviewer 5: Same as above with `--group` being removed

Reviewer 3: Updated

* xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#nested_group_behavior[`nested_group_behavior`]: Controls how Redpanda handles group names that use path-style notation (for example, `/departments/eng/platform`). Set to `none` to use the full path as-is, or `suffix` to extract only the last segment. Default: `none`.
+
NOTE: When `nested_group_behavior` is set to `suffix`, groups that share a leaf name (for example, `/departments/eng/groupA` and `/departments/sales/groupA`) both resolve to `Group:groupA`. ACLs or role assignments for that principal apply to members of both groups. Design your group naming conventions to avoid unintended collisions.

To update these properties, use xref:manage:cluster-maintenance/cluster-property-configuration.adoc[any configuration method] (`rpk cluster config set`, the Admin API, or Redpanda Console). Changes take effect immediately without a restart.
endif::[]

> === Token structure examples

Reviewer 4: **Conditionalization gap:** The explanatory paragraph about `oidc_group_claim_path` and `nested_group_behavior` (lines 425-434) is wrapped in `ifndef::env-cloud[]`, but the `=== Token structure examples` subsection that follows (line 436) is **not** conditionalized. This means Cloud users will see the token structure examples without the preceding context explaining what the cluster properties are or why the token format matters.

Consider either:
1. Adding a brief Cloud-specific intro sentence before the examples (e.g., "Redpanda extracts group names from a configurable claim path in the JWT token. The following examples show how different token formats map to group principals."), or
2. Wrapping the `=== Token structure examples` heading inside the same conditional so Cloud users don't see examples without context.

Reviewer 3: Added details on claim path mapping in Cloud

* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity/hybrid/connect/how-to-connect-fed-group-claims[Microsoft Entra ID (Azure AD)^]: Configure group claims in the application manifest.

For IdP-specific configuration steps, see your provider's documentation.

== Limitations

* Azure AD group limit: Users with more than 200 group memberships in Azure AD receive a URL reference in their token instead of a list of group names. Redpanda does not follow that URL and cannot resolve groups in this case.
+
Mitigation: Filter token claims to include only the groups relevant to Redpanda.

* Nested groups: Redpanda does not recursively resolve nested group hierarchies. If group A contains group B, only the direct memberships reported in the token are used. Use xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#nested_group_behavior[`nested_group_behavior: suffix`] to extract the last path segment from hierarchical group names when needed.

* No wildcard ACLs for groups: ACL matching for `Group:` principals uses literal string comparison only. Wildcard patterns are not supported.

ifdef::env-cloud[]
== Register groups in Redpanda Cloud

> To assign an IdP group to a role or ACL, you must first register the group:

Reviewer 6: In the rendered output, there are two periods

<img width="601" height="185" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9a0cb3ed-b48f-4ae7-9211-b2a30eb92d9d" />

Reviewer 3: The deploy preview was not regenerated with today's updates. It now looks like this https://deploy-preview-536--rp-cloud.netlify.app/redpanda-cloud/security/authorization/gbac/#register-groups-in-redpanda-cloud

Reviewer 3: The deploy preview is now updated with the latest changes https://deploy-preview-536--rp-cloud.netlify.app/redpanda-cloud/security/authorization/gbac/#register-groups-in-redpanda-cloud
